docs: Create ADR on Documentation Translation (#2050)
openedx/edx-documentation: decisions/0001-develop-documentation-translation-process.rst

released, the translation process should also be triggered to translate the
Nutmeg Documentation.

2. How is the translation process triggered?
=============================================

An Admin account must add documents to a Transifex Project in order for them to
be translated. Admin accounts have access to financial information and the
ability to delete Transifex Projects. In order to keep this part of the process
secure, we believe that a human should be involved in this process to assure
that financial information stays in the right hands and so that an accidental
merge will not delete Transifex projects. Currently, a GitHub bot account with
Admin access to Transifex updates the translations for several repositories.
This is the old and insecure way of doing it that neither Transifex nor GitHub
recommend. We are retiring that bot account in preference to this secure and
modern method. We believe that elevated permissions should not be granted to a
bot or an app, and we should instead do a bit of the work manually to ensure
that we receive the results we want. That is not to say that some parts of this
process cannot be automated.

> Bringing translatable documentation material into Transifex:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bringing translatable documentation material into Transifex:

```

Author: Added new-line before lists

>  #. A new named Open edX release branch of edx-documentation repo is made that

Reviewer: perhaps "is made by an automated script" (if that is right... I believe this process is manual)

Translators use Transifex to translate strings stripped from the documentation.
These strings are kept in a Project in Transifex, where each string belongs to
a uniquely named document, which is related to a document in the documentation.
In Transifex, Projects can be grouped together to share the same "Transifex
Memory". Through this feature, strings from previous releases of the
documentation that are identical to the current release of documentation will
be automatically translated, thus speeding up the time it takes to translate
the entire document. For example, if the Nutmeg release has been completely
translated and is in Transifex Memory, when the Olive release is cut, the
strings will look for identical strings from the Documentation in the Nutmeg
release and automatically populate them.

Upcoming work will automate the process of syncing files between GitHub and
Transifex via an established but new to us GitHub App. A GitHub App is an
integration between two services, in this case, GitHub and Transifex. Once a
preset fraction of the strings are translated, the GitHub App integrated with
Transifex will create a new Pull Request and notify Transifex Admins by adding

> them for a review. Once reviewed, a Transifex Admin will then merge the Pull

Reviewer: Why can't this PR be auto-merged?

Author: It can be, but then very little of this process is supervised by a human. And I thought that was one of the things we wanted.

Reviewer: In other repos I believe the PR to fold translations back into the repo is auto-merged. What would human eyes add here?

The only thing that I feel is very necessary to involve a human are those things requiring administrative privileges.

Author: I didn't realize that translations were auto-merged in other repos.
I guess human eyes unfamiliar with the translated and reviewed strings would not add any other value here.

I'll change this.

Develop the Documentation Translation Process
#############################################

Description
***********

The edx-documentation repo contains important documentation written in English. Many users have a requirement for the important information found in this repository to be available in other languages. In order to provide the documentation in a variety of languages, a process must be designed and agreed upon to serve the greater open source community.

In this ADR, we will describe: 
 #. When the translation process is triggered
 #. How the translation process is triggered
 #. How the translation process works
 #. How the translated documents will be integrated along with the rest of the documentation

Answers to the questions
************************

1. When is the translation process triggered?
=============================================
 

> Every six months, a newly named Open edX release is created, which includes the documentation. When this release is "cut", the translation process should also be triggered. So in the next case, where the Nutmeg version of the Open edX software is released, the translation process should also be triggered to translate the Nutmeg Documentation.

Reviewer: Nit: For those reading in the future, you may want to switch "So in the next case" with "For example,"

Author: That's a good note. I'll change it so it makes more sense for future readers.

Rationale
*********

This process is guided by the respect for secure measures with financial information, the desire to keep everything as open source as possible by keeping PR records, and by the hybrid Human-Computer process involved with translating documentation.

Next Steps
**********
Not all of the documentation lives in the openedx/edx-documentation repository. In the future documentation will continue to be distributed amongst a number of repositories. The process described here will be used as a guide to bring Translations efficiently and consistently to all Open edX documentation repositories.

Location in GitHub
******************

> The documentation will remain in openedx/edx-documentation. The translations can be located in a new repository openedx/documentation-translations.

Reviewer: Question: Do we have the pattern of keeping translations in a separate repository? This is something I've wanted for awhile - particularly the ability to keep translations separate from the code (to decrease repo clone/pull time), and, crucially I think, have the ability to have _all_ translations in that repo, with an instance pulling only the translations they need. IIRC we don't have this and I don't know what's involved with doing this.

Author: We do not currently have that pattern, but this could change with the restructuring of the Documentation. There are a lot of advantages to keeping translations separate from the rest of the documentation. The one sticky point is that I'm not sure if ReadTheDocs supports the pulling of translations from a separate repo.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's what I thought. I might be more clear in this sentence, something like, "If time, engineering work will be done so that the translations would be located in a new repository. If not, the translations will be co-located with the original strings as per the pattern in other openedx repositories."

Author: Definitely. I'll add a couple sentences to that effect.

2. How is the translation process triggered?
=============================================
An Admin account must add documents to a Transifex Project in order for them to be translated. Admin accounts have access to financial information and the ability to delete Transifex Projects. In order to keep this part of the process secure, we believe that a human should be involved in this process to assure that financial information stays in the right hands and so that an accidental merge will not delete Transifex projects. Currently, a GitHub bot account with Admin access to Transifex updates the translations for several repositories. This is the old and insecure way of doing it that neither Transifex nor GitHub recommend. We are retiring that bot account in preference to this secure and modern method. We believe that elevated permissions should not be granted to a bot or an app, and we should instead do a bit of the work manually to ensure that we receive the results we want. That is not to say that some parts of this process cannot be automated.

Bringing translatable documentation material into Transifex:

>  #. When a new named release is cut, a Github Pull Request should be created that tags Github users that are also Transifex Admins. This GitHub PR will contain the generated files to be uploaded to Transifex.

Reviewer: Do we want to dip our toe just a little deeper into technical details? IE you say, 

> When a new named release is cut, a Github Pull Request should be created that tags Github users that are also Transifex Admins.

Who makes this PR? How do they remember to do so? Is it maybe part of a script that BTR runs when creating the release?

Author: If possible, this should be a github action. Unfortunately, at the moment, edx-platform is not really published in a way with a lot of finality. As far as I know, it does a soft publication into a branch. Even if we had an action for the creation of a new branch that follows the scheme open-release/*.master, this would still probably not be the best way of doing this.

I guess the details pertaining to this question depend on the process of cutting a new release.

Author: The translation of the documentation of each new named Open edX release should begin when the branch is formed. Unfortunately, this means that as the documentation is finalized, the strings that need to be translated, will change as well. Luckily, Transifex already supplies this [functionality](https://docs.transifex.com/projects/updating-content/). Strings that are updated will need to be translated, but strings that stay the same will keep their translations.

We first upload documentation to Transifex any branch that matches the pattern we currently use. And we set the GitHub integration to re-upload document strings with every merge to that branch. Translators will then translate the document. And as the documentation is updated, translators can also translate those updated strings.

Is this ideal? No. Translators may have to retranslate the contents of a document that was already translated before it was updated. It is a concession we have to make if we want updated software, and we want those updates documented, and we want that documentation translated. There will always be some inefficiencies in this pipeline as those three tasks cannot work perfectly in parallel since software updates continuously.

 #. To complete the process, the Github User/Transifex Admin will pull the PR and locally run a script which uses their own credentials that uploads the documents to Transifex.

>  #. The user would then merge the PR as a record that the material is on Transifex and ready to be translated by the greater open source community.

Reviewer: I think in 2 & 3 I'd just use "Transifex Admin" oven "user" for clarity. But take/leave that suggestion.

Author: This makes sense. I'll change it to Transifex Admin

3. How does the translation process work?
=============================================
Translators use Transifex to translate strings stripped from the documentation. These strings are kept in a Project in Transifex, where each string belongs to a uniquely named document, which is related to a document in the documentation. In Transifex, Projects can be grouped together to share the same "Transifex Memory". Through this feature, strings from previous releases of the documentation that are identical to the current release of documentation will be automatically translated, thus speeding up the time it takes to translate the entire document. For example, if the Nutmeg release has been completely translated and is in Transifex Memory, when the Olive release is cut, the strings will look for identical strings from the Documentation in the Nutmeg release and automatically populate them.

> Upcoming work will automate the process of syncing files between GitHub and Transifex. Once a preset fraction of the strings are translated, a notice will be triggered to Transifex Admins that translations are ready. This will create a new Pull Request with these new translations. A maintainer of the edx-documentation repo will be asked for a review, and in combination with Transifex Admins, merged. In addition, this syncing process can be run regularly after the threshold is reached in order to increase the fraction of strings translated.

Reviewer: Again dipping our toes into implementation, is it worth elaborating just a tad on what the upcoming work is? I don't remember if you're using GH Apps or not, but I could see something like:

Upcoming work will automate the process of syncing files between GitHub and Transifex via a (new? pre-existing?) GitHub App. A GitHub App is an integration between two services, in this case, GitHub and Transifex.  Once a preset fraction of the strings are translated, the GitHub App will create a new Pull Request with these new translations.

I'm actually a bit unsure what you meant by

> a notice will be triggered to Transifex Admins that translations are ready. This will create a new Pull Request with these new translations.

What is the form of the notice? The way this reads is that Transifex Admins will receive the notice and make a manual PR.

Author: Ah, thats not my intention.
The PR will be made by the Github integration. And Transifex Admins should be notified that the PR was made by being tagged as reviewers to approve and merge the PR.

4. How will the translated documents be integrated along with the rest of the documentation?
============================================================================================

> Translated documents will be kept in a newly created separate repository to avoid having to recut a named Open edX release everytime translations are added or updated. During the building process of the documents, it will check for the existence of these translated documents, and build with them if they exist. Translations will be available both by locale and by selection as is currently supported by Sphinx and Read the Docs. So for example, while the default option for document readers in the US locale will be English, they will also be able to select other translated documents.

Reviewer: > Translated documents will be kept in a newly created separate repository

Ah, I missed this was included in scope of work, but in the "Location in GitHub" section it's been changed to say that's add on work if time. Let's make sure those are in sync. I still think you should do the first round work of simply getting the integration with the translations in-repo, then tackle this as a Phase 2 to make sure you have incremental deliverables.

Have you done research on how this might be accomplished?

Reviewer 2: +1 on this I also think "Location in GitHub" better be detailed out intially, since the decision on this is going to affect most if not all phases of i18n of the doc.. more detials in my comment below

Author: I will update the text to mention tackling this work as a phase 2.

As for research on how the translations and documentation versions can be selected, the [python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/) which is built with sphinx, offers both of these. We can just copy what they do directly from the [Doc subdirectory of the Python Repo](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/main/Doc).

Reviewer: thanks Carlos!

Rationale
*********

This process is guided by the respect for secure measures with financial information, the desire to keep everything as open source as possible by keeping PR records, and by the hybrid Human-Computer process involved with translating documentation.

Next Steps
**********
Not all of the documentation lives in the openedx/edx-documentation repository. In the future documentation will continue to be distributed amongst a number of repositories. The process described here will be used as a guide to bring Translations efficiently and consistently to all Open edX documentation repositories.

Location in GitHub
******************

The documentation will remain in openedx/edx-documentation. It time permits, engineering work will be done so that the translations can be located in a new repository named openedx/documentation-translations. If not, the translations will be co-located with the original strings as per the pattern in other Open edX repositories.

> Moving the translations to their own repository could be beneficial. Keeping the translations separate from the code that generates the documentation could dcrease repo clone/pull time. In addition, all translations could be kept in the same repo, and only the translations needed could be pulled from this repo. Lastly, when a new release of the documentation is cut, it can be separate from the translations that may be updating over a longer period of time, but still connected to a specfic version of the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving the translations to their own repository could be beneficial. Keeping the translations separate from the code that generates the documentation could decrease repo clone/pull time. In addition, all translations could be kept in the same repo, and only the translations needed could be pulled from this repo. Lastly, when a new release of the documentation is cut, it can be separate from the translations that may be updating over a longer period of time, but still connected to a specific version of the documentation.
```

Author: fixed!
